JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
It's the eve of the final
presidential debate.
Hillary Clinton prepares behind
closed doors,
while we consider Donald Trump's
claims of
a media conspiracy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Tuesday,
John Yang reports from Nevada,
where a Republican
split on Donald Trump creates a
close race
for a crucial Senate seat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as the
international community
struggles with a refugee crisis,
how Uganda
is becoming one of the most
welcoming countries
for those fleeing conflict.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Camps tend
to confine
people, whereas, in Uganda, when
refugees
arrive, they are issued legal
I.D.s that entitle
them to move freely anywhere in
the country
to find a job, start a business,
put their
children in school.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's three weeks
to go until
Election Day, just 24 hours
until the last
presidential debate, and charges
of vote fraud
and media bias are swirling.
Today, the current occupant of
the White House
dismissed such talk, and rebuked
the candidate
behind it.
It was a Rose Garden welcome for
the Italian
prime minister, and President
Obama used it
to call out Donald Trump on his
claims of
a rigged election.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
You start whining before the
game is even
over, if whenever things are
going badly for
you or you lose, you start
blaming somebody
else, then you don't have what
it takes to
be in this job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump shot back
this afternoon
in Colorado Springs.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
But they even want to try and
rig the election
at the polling booths, where so
many cities
are corrupt, and you see that.
And voter fraud is all too
common.
And then they criticize us for
saying that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Running mate Mike
Pence joined
in.
Visiting Republican Party
offices in rural
North Carolina that were
firebombed over the
weekend, he insisted voter fraud
is a reality,
and called for voters to be on
the lookout.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
Donald Trump and I are
encouraging all of
our supporters around the
country and frankly
American, whatever their
politics, to take
the opportunity to be involved
in a respectful
way in providing accountability
at our polling
places.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pence also
complained of media
bias and what he called scant
coverage of
negative news about Clinton.
The latest such news involved
communications
between the FBI and a senior
State Department
official who wanted one of
Clinton's e-mails
reclassified.
It wasn't.
But last night in Green Bay,
Wisconsin, Trump
charged there's collusion in the
Obama administration
to help Clinton.
The candidate's wife, Melania,
was on CNN,
claiming that the sexual assault
allegations
against her husband are not
true.
MELANIA TRUMP, Wife of Donald
Trump: I believe
my husband.
I believe my husband.
This was all organized from the
opposition.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former "People"
magazine writer
Natasha Stoynoff is one of the
accusers.
She stated that Trump forced
himself on her
in 2005.
And, today, the publication
reported that
six of her colleagues and close
friends corroborate
her account.
Meanwhile, Clinton remained out
of the public
eye today, even as poll after
poll offered
her good news.
The Washington Post reported she
has a clear
advantage in the latest survey
of battleground
states.
And a USA Today poll found 68
percent of young
voters favor the Democratic
nominee, to 20
percent for Trump.
All of this sets the stage for
tomorrow night's
third and final encounter
between the two
nominees, this one in Las Vegas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
Iraqi forces slowed their
advance on Mosul
in its second day, as they
reached larger
towns on the outskirts.
Humanitarian groups warned the
city's one
million people could face a
disaster.
But President Obama said plans
are in place
to avert a crisis.
We will explore the situation in
Mosul later
in the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next door in
Syria, Russian
halted strikes on Aleppo today,
ahead of their
call for a short-term stop to
all fighting
on Thursday.
It's meant to allow humanitarian
aid into
that ravaged city.
But in Moscow, the Russian
defense minister
warned militant groups to
evacuate when the
fighting stops.
SERGEI SHOIGU, Russian Defense
Minister (through
translator): We call on the
leadership of
countries that have influence
over armed groups
in Eastern Aleppo to convince
their leaders
to stop military action and
abandon the city.
Everyone truly interested in the
fastest possible
stabilization should take
genuine political
steps and not continue shuffling
political
papers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thursday's pause
in the fighting
is set to last eight hours.
A United Nations spokesman
complained today
that that's not nearly enough
time to get
humanitarian convoys in and out
of Aleppo.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A temporary
halt to the
fighting in Yemen is also in the
works.
The country's warring factions
agreed today
to a 72-hour cease-fire,
beginning shortly
before midnight Wednesday.
It's to allow much-needed
humanitarian aid
to be delivered.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Iran, a court
has sentenced
an Iranian-American businessman
and his father
to 10 years in prison each.
Siamak Namazi was detained a
year ago.
His 80-year-old father was
arrested in February.
Today's announcement says they
were sentenced
for -- quote -- "cooperating
with the hostile
government of America."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country, for
a fifth straight year, Social
Security recipients
and federal retirees will get
just a tiny
bump in benefits.
The annual cost-of-living hike
announced today
is three-tenths of a percent.
The average monthly Social
Security payment
is $1,238.
That means the increase for the
coming year
will be less than $4 a month.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street moved
higher today,
thanks to some strong earnings.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 75
points to close near 18162.
The Nasdaq rose 44 points, and
the S&P 500
added 13.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the
original ruby slippers
from "The Wizard of Oz" will get
a makeover
if the Smithsonian can raise
$300,000.
It's asking the public to help
on the crowdfunding
Web site Kickstarter.
The ruby slippers are nearly 80
years old,
and showing their age, at the
National Museum
of Natural History in
Washington.
The institution wants to repair
them and build
a new display.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what's driving
the idea that the media is
rigging the election;
a tight race in Nevada as
Democrats try to
take back the Senate; the
looming humanitarian
crisis in Iraq; and much more.
Claims of news media bias in
politics are
certainly nothing new.
But what of Donald Trump's
accusation that
the press is actually
responsible for rigging
the presidential election
against him?
To explore that notion, we are
joined by Jim
Rutenberg, media columnist for
The New York
Times, and Robert Lichter.
He's director of the center for
Media and
Public Affairs at George Mason
University.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
I'm going to start with you,
Robert Lichter.
Donald Trump is saying that the
media -- and
I'm quoting -- is being -- that
the election
is being rigged by what he calls
the dishonest,
distorted media pushing Hillary
Clinton.
You have studied the American
media for, what,
decades?
Is there a grain of truth to
what he says?
ROBERT LICHTER, George Mason
University: Well,
when people say the media are
biased, they
usually mean somebody is getting
too much
attention, more than he
deserves, and his
coverage is more favorable than
he should
get.
Donald Trump is a news magnet.
He gets more attention than
anybody else,
but a lot of that attention
compares him either
with Hitler or Mussolini.
So studies show what our eyes
see, that Trump
gets a lot of coverage, that his
coverage
is very negative.
He has managed the considerable
feat of getting
more negative coverage than
Hillary Clinton,
who has issues in her own right.
I think that -- so you could
make a case that
there is bias.
I think the question is whether
the traditional
definitions of bias apply to
such a nontraditional
candidate as Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jim Rutenberg,
how do you see
this?
You write about this stuff
frequently for
The Times.
JIM RUTENBERG, The New York
Times: I think
I would agree with that
assessment to a degree.
One thing is, though, that
Donald Trump's
candidacy has been so amazing
and has been
such -- it has had such a
can't-look-away
quality, because he says things
that we're
not used to hearing from the
standard-bearer
oft Republican Party.
So, to the extent that some of
the things
are about the appearances of
women, what have
you, what we just heard on the
"Access Hollywood"
leaked tape of him discussing
his behavior
with women, was at best
descriptions of groping,
there's going to be a reaction
to it.
The press is going to cover
that, and it's
going to, yes, be negative, but
it is also
what it is.
It's a pretty accurate
description of what
he said in that tape, for
instance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's take
this a little
bit further.
What Donald Trump -- Bob
Lichter, what Donald
Trump is saying is that the
media is in collusion
with the Clinton campaign.
What evidence is there that that
could possibly
be true?
ROBERT LICHTER: Well, they have
been so nice
to her about her e-mails, I
think, is a piece
of evidence.
It's perfectly obvious, and,
again, studies
show that her coverage is more
negative than
positive.
There's been...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wait a minute.
There was one story about a
member of the
Clinton organization passing
along information
ahead of a debate.
Is that right?
ROBERT LICHTER: Right.
Yes.
There was that one story.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
ROBERT LICHTER: And then there
is the issue
of her not turning these over,
which has been
raised many, many times by
Donald Trump and
by journalists.
So I think they're just -- there
isn't a case
that can be made that the media
has gone soft
of Hillary Clinton.
She's not getting great coverage
either.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, in fact --
and Bob Lichter
just referred to this, Jim
Rutenberg -- the
media, especially television
media, can be
credited for giving Donald Trump
a lot of
airtime, a lot of print space
during the primary
period.
JIM RUTENBERG: I mean, this
drove his Republican
competitors for the nomination
crazy.
And there was one analysis that
my newspaper
wrote about where the figure
that was used
in terms of -- quote, unquote --
"free media"
-- this was the value of the
extra airtime
he got from the news networks --
was some
$2 billion.
No candidate came close.
So he draws the cameras.
It can be a good thing for him.
Sometimes, it's a bad thing for
him.
Right now, it's not going so
well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you put
this in historical
perspective, Bob Lichter?
We know the role of the press
has changed
in this country.
I mean, you have talked about
how, 17th, 18th
centuries, we had a partisan
press in the
United States.
ROBERT LICHTER: Yes, Donald
Trump should go
back a couple of hundred years
and see the
nasty things that were said
about Adams and
Jefferson.
It's only the 20th century that
the press
has taken on the role of being
an objective
arbiter, trying to be fair and
balanced and
objective.
And in a way, it releases
journalists from
the responsibility of saying I'm
presenting
this from my point of view, sort
of nobody's
point of view.
I'm being fair all around.
Donald Trump makes that really
hard to do.
This is man who insults members
of his own
party.
He bullies his opponents.
He says things that are
demonstrably untrue.
What do you do with that as a
journalist to
be objective without becoming
negative in
a way that opens you to charges
of media bias?
I think Trump has done a good
job of kind
of defanging the media, to some
degree.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Jim
Rutenberg, you have
also written about how Donald
Trump has singled
out the press at his campaign
rallies, to
the point where members of the
press have
felt uncomfortable and worse.
JIM RUTENBERG: Well, two major
networks are
now using security at his
rallies.
And it's kind of, he will direct
the crowd
at the assembled press.
And I have covered many rallies
in my career
where that hasn't happened, with
the exception
of maybe Sarah Palin kind of
toward the end
of '08 and when she was kind of
flirting with
her own presidential run.
And other colleagues I have
talked to who
are much older than I am refer
me back the
George Wallace and some of his
rallies were
tense.
But the National Guard was there
protecting
the press.
But this is the insane territory
to be in,
as a country right now, where
this is a conversation
we're having.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jim Rutenberg,
staying with
you, I want to come back to
something you
quoted this week in one of your
columns, a
senior editor at the Web site
American Conservative,
and he -- it's Rod Dreher, I
think is how
you say his name.
He said: "Mainstream journalists
are interested
in every kind of diversity,
except the kind
that would challenge their own
prejudices.
Those include bigotry against
conservative
religion, bigotry against rural
folks and
bigotry against working-class
and poor white
people."
That's pretty sweeping, isn't
it?
JIM RUTENBERG: It's a sweeping
generalization,
but, that said, I think, look,
we're not perfect.
And for what most of our
conversations so
far have been a defense of the
press, but
the press -- let's face it.
A big part of the country is
primed to believe
what Donald Trump is telling
them about the
press.
And the press needs to
definitely take a look
at itself.
And look, there is something to
it.
There is a cultural mind-set
that I think
even goes across the kind of
ideological divide
of the mainstream news media.
The Wall Street Journal
editorial page and
The New York Times editorial
page agree on
certain things like free trade
that this crowd
feels is, you know, threatening
their livelihoods
and their country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
we know that
-- you have talked, Robert
Lichter, about
the need for American --
frankly, for journalists
to rethink the way we write
about, not just
Donald Trump, but the people who
have been
supporting Donald Trump.
ROBERT LICHTER: Yes, I think Jim
Rutenberg
was quite right that
journalists, national
media journalists are kind of
part of an elite.
And they know government elites,
they know
business elites.
And it's these elites that
Donald Trump is
running against.
And, as a result, he stirs the
populism of
his supporters, who also feel
that the elites
are running away with the
country, although
I think it's overstated to say
that these
are kind of peasants with
pitchforks.
I think there is a kind of bias
in that portrayal
of his supporters.
There are some of those people,
but he obviously
wouldn't be running in the
40-odd percent
of the public with nobody like
-- with everybody
like that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No question about
that.
Robert Lichter, we thank you.
Jim Rutenberg with The New York
Times, thank
you both.
JIM RUTENBERG: Thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From the press,
we turn to
Nevada for the "NewsHour"'s
latest on-the-ground
report.
A split amongst Republicans,
paired with sluggish
growth in construction, means
that jobs are
front and center, and a key
Senate race is
now in play.
John Yang reports.
It's part of our continuing
series on poverty
and opportunity in America,
Chasing the Dream.
ANNOUNCER: When news breaks, we
talk about
it.
ANNOUNCER: This is News Talk 840
AM.
JOHN YANG: The sun rises over
the Nevada Desert,
one day closer to the election.
HEIDI HARRIS, Radio Talk Show
Host: Why don't
we just change the name to
groper in chief?
JOHN YANG: And Heidi Harris is
talking to
the biggest audience of any Las
Vegas morning
radio talk show host.
A hot topic, the very tight
Senate contest
between Republican Joe Heck and
Democrat Catherine
Cortez Masto.
HEIDI HARRIS: I tried to watch
Heck and Masto.
I tried to watch it.
I did.
REP.
JOE HECK (R-NV), Senatorial
Candidate: Therefore,
I cannot in good conscience
continue to support
Donald Trump.
JOHN YANG: Heck shook up the
race when he
jumped off the Donald Trump
bandwagon after
the now-infamous "Access
Hollywood" tape surfaced,
one of more than a dozen
Republicans in tough
congressional races to withdraw
their support.
Now some Trump supporters say
they're dumping
Heck, like this caller to the
Heidi Harris
show.
CALLER: It's time to send a
message.
We put Donald Trump there for a
reason, and
that's how I feel.
I will be voting for Donald and
the ballot
questions, but not for Joe Heck.
JOHN YANG: Harris, a reluctant
Trump supporter,
says she hears that a lot from
listeners.
HEIDI HARRIS: I don't know that
many of them
are going to vote for her
instead of him,
Catherine Cortez Masto, but I
think they're
going to stay home and not vote
for Heck,
which essentially gives her a
free vote.
JOHN YANG: With early voting
beginning Saturday,
it's become a big campaign
issue.
Heck was pressed on his
about-face last week
in a televised debate.
He said it was a personal
decision.
REP.
JOE HECK: As an emergency
department doctor,
I have taken care of far too
many women who've
been victims of domestic
violence or sexual
assault.
And I have great empathy for
anyone who ever
had to experience such a
tragedy.
My wife was a victim of domestic
abuse in
a prior relationship.
JOHN YANG: Cortez Masto wasn't
buying it.
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO (D),
Nevada Senatorial
Candidate: Let's call this for
what it is.
Congressman Heck was worried
about his political
career.
JOHN YANG: It was Heck's last
public appearance
before leaving for a week-long
Army Reserve
assignment at the Pentagon,
where he's General
Heck.
Nevada's desert and mountains
can feel remote,
but its politics are
surprisingly typical.
Since 1908, it has failed to
vote for winner
of the White House just once.
And this year, it may decide who
controls
the Senate.
Analysts say it's the
Republicans' best shot
at winning a Democratic-held
seat.
It's attracting outsized
interest and money.
NARRATOR: Who else has sunk
millions in to
elect Joe Heck?
JOHN YANG: Nearly $49 million
worth of ads
from outside groups, many in
Spanish in this
state that's about 30 percent
Latino.
Whoever wins this race will
become only the
fifth person to elected to the
seat since
1933, replacing Senate
Democratic Leader Harry
Reid, who's retiring after 30
years.
Heck served in the Nevada state
Senate and
was elected to the House in
2010.
Cortez Masto is a former federal
prosecutor
and two-term Nevada attorney
general.
Even before his un-endorsement,
Heck said
he disagreed with Trump's
remarks about women
and minorities.
This week, CNN published an
audiotape of Heck,
authenticated by his campaign,
at closed-door
Las Vegas fund-raiser.
REP.
JOE HECK: I want to support him.
I really do, but he has got to
change his
tone.
And he's got to be -- I don't
want to make
him into a politician or make
him into the
same thing that he is running
against.
But he has got to realize that
he is not going
to win this race by appealing to
the 20 percent
or 30 percent of the Republican
base.
JOHN YANG: Gun store owner Bob
Irwin, a Republican
backing Trump, says he's
disappointed by Heck's
decision, blaming Heck's
campaign managers.
BOB IRWIN, Gun Store Owner: The
new guys are
trying to make a politician out
of him.
He's not a politician.
I thought he should just simply
rise above
the fray and talk about
Obamacare and creating
jobs by changing the tax
structure to bring
businesses into the country.
JOHN YANG: But he says he will
still vote
for Heck.
Iowa Republican Senator Joni
Ernst, a Trump
supporter standing in for Heck
while he's
on Reserve duty, seemed to open
the door to
ticket-splitting.
SEN.
JONI ERNST (R), Iowa: We need to
separate
the presidential race from what
is really
important right now, the United
States Senate
race as well.
That's what Joe is running for.
JOHN YANG: Cortez Masto welcomes
Hillary Clinton's
embrace, appearing with her last
week in Las
Vegas.
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO: There's
going to be
things that we disagree on, but
that's part
of the process, right?
And then we work together and
find compromise
along the way.
That's how it should work.
JOHN YANG: President Obama will
visit this
coming weekend to campaign for
both Cortez
Masto and Clinton.
The economy is a big issue in
both the Senate
and presidential races, which
polls show both
very close.
No state boomed like Nevada
until the recession,
when it went bust like no other
state.
When the real estate bubble
burst, the carpenters
union went from 18 million
manhours a year
to two million.
Frank Hawk is the union's
business manager.
FRANK HAWK, Carpenters Union: In
2009, we
had a record amount of suicides
in our local
here.
We were losing about 15 a month
to suicides.
People were cashing in their
retirement to
save their houses, only to lose
them anyway.
In 2010, we had a record amount
of cardiac
arrests for people under 45.
And that was due to the stress.
JOHN YANG: The union backed Heck
when he ran
for the House, but now they're
behind Cortez
Masto, with members going
door-to-door for
her and the rest of the
Democratic ticket.
David Damore is a political
scientist at the
University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
DAVID DAMORE, Political
Scientist, University
of Nevada, Las Vegas: What's
missing from
our -- from the return here of
the economy
is those construction jobs.
Those were a real driver, and as
opposed to
being, you know, $10 job hours,
they're $30,
$40 job hours there.
JOHN YANG: That blue-collar
frustration is
driving some of Trump's support.
DAVID DAMORE: He's also, of
course, mobilizing
working-class whites.
You have a smaller share of
college-educated
people in Nevada, so some of the
sort of cultural
movement away from the
Republican Party isn't
quite so strong in Nevada.
Clearly, Trump is a mobilizer on
both sides,
right?
He's mobilizing Latino voters in
a way that
we haven't seen.
JOHN YANG: Driving them, Damore
says, to the
Democrats, like the family and
friends who
gathered Sunday night on the
west side of
Las Vegas.
In the kitchen, it was dinner,
in the living
room, politics watching a
Spanish-language
rebroadcast of the Heck-Cortez
Masto debate.
Since January, activist Jose
Macias, whose
parents came to the United
States illegally,
has helped dozens of Latinos
become citizens
so they can vote next month.
JOSE MACIAS, Community Activist:
We have to
go out there and really, really
show the numbers
of the power we do have, because
a lot of
candidates think that we don't
have power
when they're talking to the
rallies, attacking
Mexicans, attacking women,
people of color.
The reason that I'm working for
a vote, we
have to make sure that we tell
them that we
do matter.
JOHN YANG: Mobilizing to try to
help decide
who wins the White House and the
Senate.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang in Las
Vegas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One subject
that's sure
to come up in the final
presidential debate
is the state of the American
economy, and,
more specifically, the state of
the American
worker.
During the primary season, in
what now seems
ages ago, we looked at
Americans' attitudes
toward the economy.
We have an update tonight with
our partners
at Marketplace and "Frontline,"
part of our
series on How the Deck Is
Stacked.
The unemployment rate may now
stand at 5 percent
officially, and more than 10
million new jobs
have been created during the
Obama administration.
But a new survey done by
Marketplace and Edison
Research found nearly a third of
people are
afraid of losing their jobs
within the next
six months, and almost 40
percent of people
say they are losing sleep over
their financial
situation.
Marketplace host Kai Ryssdal is
with us again.
Kai, when we first did this a
year ago, we
expected things to get better.
Why are people more anxious now
and seem less
financially secure?
KAI RYSSDAL, Marketplace: The
thing about
the economy, Hari, is that we
measure it in
numbers, right, things like the
unemployment
rate, but people experience it
through how
they feel.
And what they're feeling now is
anxiety, possibly
because the election is drawing
near, possibly
because they sense that the
headline numbers
of unemployment at 5 percent and
gross domestic
product growing at a
percent-and-a-half, plus
or minus, they're not feeling
that in their
lives, while, at the same time,
food prices
are going up and gas is bopping
around, $2.5,
$3 a gallon, whatever it is.
People don't feel that security
they really
would like to feel seven years
now into an
economic expansion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All the
numbers that you
just rattled off, what's
interesting is that
your survey also reveals that
there's a lack
of trust in the data itself.
KAI RYSSDAL: Oh, yes.
So, this was, to me anyway, one
most of interesting
and disturbing things about this
entire survey.
We asked people whether they
trust government
economic data, the stuff that we
do on Marketplace
all the time, consumer spending,
the unemployment
rate, all of that stuff; 25
percent of all
Americans completely distrust
government economic
data.
And then you drill down a little
bit and you
ask them to -- who they're
voting for and
how they feel about government
data, 48 percent
of Donald Trump voters distrust
government
data; 5 percent of Hillary
Clinton voters
distrust the economic data.
And I think, if you look at
what's happening
out there on the campaign trail
and some of
the rhetoric that's coming from
the Trump
camp and from the candidate
himself, it sort
of stands to reason that his
voters are going
to distrust that data.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Speaking of
distrust, there
is also this feeling that your
survey is picking
up on about the system being
rigged.
And a couple of the numbers that
leapt out
to me, 62 percent of Americans
say that the
system, the economy is rigged.
And then, when you break this
down, 66 percent
of Trump supporters say it's
rigged for those
who get government assistance;
62 percent
of Clinton supporters say it's
rigged for
white Americans.
It's really depends on who you
ask.
But, really, regardless of who
you ask, they
still think the deck is stacked
against them.
KAI RYSSDAL: Right.
They think the desk is stacked
against them.
And what is interesting is who
they think
the deck is stacked for.
In about 90 percent of all
responses, people
think it's stacked for
politicians, for corporations
and the rich.
And what you see here is this
divide that
we're seeing now out in the
economy at large
between those who have assets,
those who have
income, those who have wealth,
and those,
as we have been talking about
for a long time
now, who simply don't, and the
income inequality
gap in this country and how it's
playing out
now in this election.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kai, are you
surprised by
these results?
Were the pollsters surprised by
KAI RYSSDAL: So, we had a whole
lot of long
conversations about this with
our partners
at Edison Research.
And I think it breaks down along
two lines.
First is, on the distrust in
government, on
the feeling that the economy is
rigged, that
plays directly from what we see
happening
out on the campaign trail.
We know Donald Trump and his
surrogates say
all the time the economy is
rigged, the election
is rigged.
And this is sort of the fallout
from that.
But also we're seeing a shift
now from what
happened in the primaries, where
you had people
like Bernie Sanders and like
Donald Trump
saying the economy is rigged,
and those numbers
now are coming home to roost.
The other thing is really that
the numbers
on income inequality and who
they think it
is rigged for can't come as a
surprise, because
what we have known for years now
is that the
gains in this economy go to the
top 1 percent.
The rest of it, the other 99
percent, just
don't get the gains.
And we're seeing that now play
out both on
the campaign trail and also in
this survey.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Kai
Ryssdal of
Marketplace and our partners at
"Frontline"
on How the Deck Is Stacked,
joining us from
L.A. today, thanks so much.
KAI RYSSDAL: You bet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
country where
refugees have been welcomed with
open arms;
and teaching politics in an
unusual and at-times
crude election.
But first: the fight over Mosul
and taking
back the last major stronghold
in Iraq for
ISIS.
We take two looks at it now,
with a Jeffrey
Brown conversation with the head
of a humanitarian
group and, to begin, this report
from the
front by John Irvine Independent
Television
News.
(GUNFIRE)
JOHN IRVINE: Keeping enemy heads
down.
I.S. aren't far away, and the
gunfire gives
Kurdish soldiers the chance for
a quick look
over no man's land.
They want a glimpse of home.
These men are from what will be
the next village
liberated.
Having fled from there in June
2014, they
can hardly wait to run.
But while some people will soon
be going back
home, others are having to flee.
They have just left Mosul.
There are a few more dangerous
undertakings
than escaping the clutches of
I.S. and crossing
over, but they managed it,
carrying a few
belongings and a white flag.
Regarding the battle, with the
help of coalition
airstrikes still smoldering
today, the Kurds
did make important gains.
Under normal circumstances, the
city of Mosul
would be just 10 minutes' drive
away.
However, for the time being, the
advance here
has been halted because advances
elsewhere
have not gone so well.
These Iraqi forces want to wait
for their
colleagues to catch up before
pressing ahead.
In a house in a captured
village, we saw rooms
full of piles of earth.
I.S. go to great lengths to hide
their tunnels
from coalition drones.
These networks amounted to
extensive living
quarters underground.
We saw only a faction of one
system in what
is a small village.
What must the defenses in Mosul
be like?
JEFFREY BROWN: And for a closer
look at what
faces civilians caught in the
crossfire, I'm
joined by David Miliband.
He's the former British foreign
secretary,
now president and CEO of the
International
Rescue Committee.
Welcome to you.
I assume that a lot of people
right now face
this immediate difficult choice
of whether
to flee the city if they can or
remain behind
and see what happens.
DAVID MILIBAND, Former British
Foreign Secretary:
You're absolutely right.
We have our own staff now
northeast and south
of the city.
About 1,000 people have so far
left since
the fighting began.
We have been talking to them.
And the perilous choice that
they face is
between staying put and waiting
to see how
the fighting develops and, on
the other hand,
trying their find their way out
of the city,
using all their savings for
transport, and
taking the risk with land mines,
sniper fire
and other kinds of interference.
And it really is a perilous
choice and a terrifying
one.
JEFFREY BROWN: Today, President
Obama said,
"It's not something I expect
will be easy,
but it perhaps hasn't been
publicized enough
the degree of planning, assets
and resources
we have devoted to this
important problem."
Now, I wonder, as the fighting
begins, how
much can the interest in
refugees and humanitarians
play into the actual fighting
strategy?
What do you see?
DAVID MILIBAND: I think that
there are two
things that are important.
First of all, we have to say
loud and clear
to all those who are engaged in
the fighting
that attention to and respect
for humanitarian
needs is absolutely imperative.
Anyone with any knowledge of
Iraq, never mind
any concern about the future,
knows that the
way in which the war is
prosecuted has a big
impact on what comes afterwards.
Secondly, there has been a lot
of planning.
The United Nations coordinator
for Iraq, Lise
Grande, is an outstanding public
servant.
The head of the United Nations
High Commission
on Refugees is in Baghdad at the
moment.
And the planning has been
serious.
But the truth is, if the numbers
rise to the
kind of level that the U.N.
fears, anything
above 500, 750, a million
people, at that
sort of scale, even at a
quarter-of-a-million
scale, it's going to overwhelm
the camps that
are being set up.
And that's why we're putting
such emphasis
on the need to support those who
flee the
city and don't find themselves
in camps, but
instead are staying with
friends, are staying
overnight in mosques, are
finding informal
ways of surviving.
And it's very important that
they get support
as well, in addition to those
who make it
to the camps that are being set
up.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, in fact,
the U.N. has
already reported that, in spite
of appeals,
it had not received additional
funding for
emergency camps and all the aid
that it thinks
it might need.
How would you describe the
shortfall at this
point?
DAVID MILIBAND: Well, I think
that 60,000
tents have been put in place.
If you think they could support
a family,
you can do the numbers yourself.
At the time of the United
Nations General
Assembly last month, the U.N.
reported that
the funding was only 30 to 40
percent of what
they -- of what was needed.
Now, obviously, we don't know
the kind of
exodus that's going to take
place, but everything
the president said today
suggests that the
fighting is not going to be over
quickly.
And, therefore, we have to
prepare for a long
struggle in which the
humanitarian needs grow,
both inside the city and those
outside who
have their lives disrupted for
not just weeks,
but probably months.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, in fact, we
talked last
night on the program about the
military aspect
to this and how long it will
take.
And I see the same reports you
do today that
longer than perhaps people even
thought.
So, when you think about those
longer-term
needs from the humanitarian
aspect of this,
what's most important?
What's crying out?
DAVID MILIBAND: I think three
things need
to be preeminent.
First of all, all men and boys
over the age
of 14 are going to be screened
when they leave
the city, screened for obvious
security reasons.
It's imperative, given the
lessons in Fallujah
and elsewhere, that there's
independent monitoring
of those screening arrangements.
Otherwise, the fear of
persecution is going
to lead to chaos and frankly to
dangerous
decisions being made by
individuals.
Secondly, we need to make sure
that, as the
camps fill up, those outside
camps get better
support.
The best means of support,
frankly, is to
get them cash, because it's a
market economy
and these people will have used
up their savings
to get out of the city.
The third element is obviously
the situation
of those still trapped inside.
There's a lot of fear of land
mines and other
need for specialists' help to
help those civilians
who are inside the city, even
before you get
to the new building process
afterwards.
JEFFREY BROWN: And just briefly,
if you could,
to the extent that there are
many military
forces involved in this, is it
clear who is
in charge?
Is that a concern as well?
DAVID MILIBAND: I think it's a
very dangerous
situation for the staff of an
NGO like ours.
These are local Iraqi people.
They're local people who are
working for us.
Of course, it's a sovereign
government.
The legitimate government of
Iraq is in charge.
But you're right to point out
the multitude
of different factions and the
danger of civilians
being caught in the crossfire.
That's why, at an absolute
minimum, effective
coordination across the -- those
supporting
the Iraqi government is
absolutely imperative.
JEFFREY BROWN: David Miliband of
the International
Rescue Committee, thank you once
again.
DAVID MILIBAND: Thank you very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: In a world
struggling
to accommodate a record number
of refugees,
one country has been notably
welcoming.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro has
a report from Uganda.
It's part of his Agents for
Change series.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Nakivale in
Southern Uganda
looks like any other dusty rural
African town.
What's remarkable is that almost
none of its
113,000 residents are Ugandan.
Ethiopia?
All of these schoolchildren and
their parents
are refugees.
Burundi?
Rwanda?
Congo?
All told, 13 nations are
represented in this
crowded school, their families
fleeing conflicts
across a wide swathe of East
Africa and finding
haven in what must rank as one
of the world's
most hospitable countries to
refugees.
In Uganda, refugees are placed
in settlements
and not camps, and the
government says there's
an important difference.
Camps tend to confine people,
whereas, in
Uganda, when refugees arrive,
they are issued
legal I.D.s that entitle them to
move freely
anywhere in the country, to find
a job, start
a business, put their children
in school.
Refugees in rural areas are
given a small
plot of land to farm.
Others migrate to the urban
areas.
Somalis are among the earlier
arrivals in
recent years.
Their enclaves in the capital,
Kampala, are
well-established with small
businesses and
mosques, a predominantly Muslim
community
in a mostly Christian nation.
Mohammed Abdi runs this grocery
story with
his partner, Zahara Hassan.
MOHAMMED ABDI, Somali Immigrant
(through translator):
We have very many Ugandan
customers and we
are friends.
I am one of the Somali elders in
the community.
We interact with the elders of
the Ugandan
community, whether leaders in
this distract
or region.
And we are friends, and they
welcome us.
We're very happy.
We're like one people.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And one
scholar who's
studied refugees in Uganda says
there's reason
to be happy
ALEXANDER BETTS, Oxford
University: We showed
in the capital city of Uganda,
Kampala, 20
percent of refugees own
businesses that employ
someone else.
And of those they employ, 40
percent are citizens
of the host country.
So refugees can contribute to
the host societies
that they're part of.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Oxford
University's Alexander
Betts says Uganda is the
exception in a world
where refugees face widespread
hostility,
often stoked by politicians.
ALEXANDER BETTS: It's all too
easy to have
a race to the bottom in terms of
political
standards, where provincial and
municipal
politicians or national
politicians say, these
people are a burden.
We have to keep them out.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And while
many politicians,
especially in Western
democracies, must tread
carefully on this issue, Betts
says it's not
a problem in Uganda, where one
man rules virtually
unchallenged.
ALEXANDER BETTS: President
Museveni has been
able to adopt refugee policies
that are a
little different, in part
because there are
lower standards of
accountability to the public.
Now, not having democratic
standards is definitely
not something to celebrate, but
it highlights
the difficulties for democracies
to open up
their economies to non-citizens.
It's a hard thing for
politicians.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Recent
history might also
account for Uganda's hospitality
to refugees.
President Yoweri Museveni
himself lived in
exile for years during and after
the bloody
dictatorship of Idi Amin.
Museveni's rebels took power 30
years ago.
REV.
ZAC NIRINGIYE, Bishop, Anglican
Church of
Uganda: There's been a history
of violence
in this region.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Zac
Niringiye is a bishop
in the Anglican Church of
Uganda.
REV.
ZAC NIRINGIYE: South Sudan,
Rwanda, Burundi,
even Congo and even Uganda.
I think that that has created a
sense of being
hospitable, because you never
know.
It may be your turn next.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Despite
praise for its
hospitality, life in Uganda is
far from perfect
for refugees.
Their number has doubled in the
past five
years to more than
half-a-million, most recently
from separate conflicts in
Burundi and South
Sudan.
Many refugees, like Abebesh
Gebreslassie,
remain haunted by the ordeal
that brought
them here.
ABEBESH GEBRESLASSIE, Refugee
from Eritrea
(through translator): My husband
was killed,
my son was killed, and also my
daughter.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A son and
daughter died
in their escape from Eritrea,
part of the
exodus of hundreds of thousands
from a country
notorious for human rights
abuses.
Her son-in-law made it to Libya,
but died
in the Mediterranean.
Gebreslassie survived the
journey of thousands
of miles on foot and on trucks
with her then
6-year-old twin son and
daughter.
But she made a wrenching
decision to leave
two older teenaged children
behind.
ABEBESH GEBRESLASSIE (through
translator):
I feared if we all died, like my
son who was
shot.
I left them so that our family
can survive,
can be represented.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They are
still there now?
ABEBESH GEBRESLASSIE (through
translator):
I don't know.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Along the
way, she also
took custody of her orphaned
granddaughter,
Sara, who's now four.
ABEBESH GEBRESLASSIE (through
translator):
I don't care if I die here, but
I want a better
future for my children, and
that's not possible
without a good education.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That's not
likely in the
crowded school her children
attend, with 120
students in each classroom, and
perhaps, because
of that, teachers who aren't
very sympathetic.
There are severe consequences
for being late,
for instance.
They beat you?
STUDENT: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Who beats
you?
STUDENT: The teachers, yes, they
beat me.
The teachers, they say, if you
come late,
we wash the toilets.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So, if
you're late, you
have wash the toilets.
STUDENT: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: "They don't
understand,"
she said, "that I'm late because
I've gone
to fetch water and helped my
mother with the
chores."
In the end, Ugandan and
international officials
say it boils down to resources,
or a lack
of them.
Uganda may be hospitable, but it
has a gross
domestic product of just $600
per year per
person.
Nakivale's school is funded by
the U.N.'s
Refugee Agency.
It gives Uganda some $200
million annually
in refugee aid, a fraction of
what's needed,
but not likely to increase amid
the demands
on donor governments for
refugees out of Syria,
Iraq, Ukraine and elsewhere.
Charles Yaxley is the U.N.
agency's spokesman
in Uganda.
CHARLES YAXLEY, United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees in Uganda: Around
the world,
humanitarian financing is
arguably at breaking
point.
Currently, humanitarian appeals
for South
Sudanese and Burundian refugees
in Uganda,
both of those appeals are
severely underfunded.
We've received less than a
quarter of the
money we need for 2016, and that
leaves real
gaps in our humanitarian
response.
It means we're not able to
provide the education
support for children such as
better schools,
more schools, more teachers.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That does
not bode well
for the future of Abebesh
Gebreslassie's twins,
who shared their dreams in
halting, shy English.
What would you like to do when
you grow up?
STUDENT: When I grow up, I want
to be a doctor
and to help my mother.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: How about
you, David?
What would you like to do when
you grow up?
STUDENT: I wish to be a pilot.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: You want to
be a pilot?
STUDENT: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Yes.
Where would you like to go?
STUDENT: Every place, America,
like, I guess,
everywhere.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: America and
STUDENT: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Possible,
but like their
chance of a good education here,
with lottery-like
odds.
America admitted 70,000 refugees
last year.
The U.N. says there are 65
million displaced
people in the world today.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Nakivale, Uganda.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's reporting
is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As we know,
tomorrow's the
final presidential debate.
Tens of millions of voters will
be watching,
but there are other audiences
too, including
middle and high school students
around the
country, who are often watching
and even tweeting
as part of their civics or
government classes.
During this campaign season the
nature of
what's being discussed,
particularly questions
about sexual assault and other
tough rhetoric,
makes this a different year for
teachers and
students.
That's the focus of this week's
Making the
Grade segment.
We begin in an A.P. government
class at T.C.
Williams High School in
Alexandria, Virginia.
ANDREW ORZEL, Teacher, T.C.
Williams High
School: I guess the first
question I would
pose to you is, why?
Why actually watch these things?
Anybody have thoughts on why
you're drawn
to this?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Andrew Orzel
is getting
his seniors ready for tomorrow
night's debate.
And given what was discussed
right off the
bat in the last debate, some of
the students
are not feeling enthused about
what the candidates
might want to focus on.
ADDISON GUYNN, Student: I almost
stopped watching
the last one.
It was getting so combative, so
loud, it was
kind of just hard to get a --
like, at one
point, it gets to be difficult
to handle mentally.
ANDREW ORZEL: And I, as a
teacher, honestly
have been frustrated by this, in
that normally,
at the beginning of the year,
one of the things
we get into is ideology of
liberals believe
this, conservatives believe
this.
Presidential debates usually
show that.
And you're not actually getting
to see kind
of the liberal arguments vs.
conservative.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even, so Orzel
is assigning
his students to watch again.
He asked whether the debates
might change
anyone's mind and their
expectations if the
tone was similar.
JAMAL JABATI, Student: I feel
like Trump has
the most to gain, because he's
like -- he
was down by 11 points.
Now it's nine points.
So, if he does get on this one,
he can have
a higher chance of winning.
AMANDA EISENHOUR, Student: I
would say the
person who has potentially the
most to lose
in this election would be the
American people,
because if we become ingrained
in the idea
that this is normal, this is the
normal tone
of our political rhetoric and
discourse in
this country, then we're not
going to expect
more in debates in the future.
And it's potentially damaging to
democracy
as an institution in America for
many years
to come.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Orzel is
expected to discuss
it in class on Thursday.
And Peter Laboy says he hopes
the focus will
be different than last time.
PETER LABOY, Student: We are
here arguing
about locker room talk and Bill
Clinton.
And it's just like, instead of
talking about
what really matters, we're
talking about each
other and negative aspects.
And I just don't think that's
good.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's an
issue many teachers
are grappling with.
Some 90 percent of high school
students take
at least one civics class.
So, how are teachers dealing
with this kind
of campaign?
We hear from Richard House.
He teaches seventh grade civics
at Gunston
Middle School in Arlington,
Virginia.
And Chris Cavanaugh, who teaches
government
to juniors and seniors at
Plainfield High
School in Indiana.
Richard, let me start with you.
You're talking to an audience
that's just
turning into teenagers.
You had them watch debate one.
You didn't assign debate two.
What were their impressions?
RICHARD HOUSE, Teacher, Gunston
Middle School:
I think a lot of them, words
they used, entertained.
But I also tried to bring it
back to, let's
focus on the issues, that that
hateful rhetoric
doesn't have a place in my
classroom.
And when we're talking about the
debate, when
we're discussing it, we're going
to focus
on the issues.
So, for example, for the first
debate, I had
them pick two or three issues
that were focused
on the debate.
What did each candidate say
about them?
And then we can have a classroom
discussion.
I do not want to take time to
really focus
on some of the personal behavior
that the
candidates have exhibited and
some of the
negative behavior.
They know what I expect of them
and the expectations
that I have when they walk into
my classroom.
And this election should be
about policy and
it should be about the issues
and focusing
on them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Chris, your
high school
students, what did they think so
far?
CHRISTOPHER CAVANAUGH, Teacher,
Plainfield
High School: I think they have
been a little
bit turned off by some of the
rhetoric they
have been hearing.
I would agree that you try to
get them to
focus on the policies and not
the politics.
But, as with having older
students, you want
to allow them the freedom to be
able to discuss
some of the issues and some of
the rhetoric
that's been used in the debates.
So, it's been a tough row to
hoe, so to speak.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Chris, staying
with you
for a second, how do you
navigate some of
these topics, especially the
ones, as teenagers,
sexuality, sort of locker room
talk, all of
that that came up, all the sort
of personal
attacks that the candidates took
on each other?
How do you discuss it?
CHRISTOPHER CAVANAUGH: Right.
Well, I think I try to couch it
in historical
terms, in the fact that, you
know, I think
mudslinging is nothing new in
American politics,
or not new in politics, period.
You can go back to the Roman
states with Cicero.
Or one of my favorites is to
discuss the election
of 1800, where Jefferson accused
Adams of
having hermaphroditical
tendencies, and Adams
said that Jefferson had a
mulatto father.
So, slinging mud is nothing new
in American
politics.
It's tough to get the kids to
sort through
that to get to those policies
and to be able
to lay those policies side by
side to get
to see what the candidates are
proposing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Richard House,
as you assigned
your students to keep track of
policy positions,
did they notice what was being
talked about
and what wasn't?
RICHARD HOUSE: I think there was
definitely
a notice of the issues that they
were focusing
on, but, at the same time,
they're always
-- they're middle schoolers.
There's a certain maturity level
there.
They notice what these
candidates are saying
and the hateful rhetoric that is
coming out
of their mouths.
So, you have to forewarn them:
We're not going
to focus on that.
We're going to take the high
road.
And some of the things that are
coming out
of these candidates' mouths, I
don't want
them coming out of yours.
I do want them to be able to
formulate their
own opinions, but, at the same
time, they
also have to know that, in my
classroom, bigotry
and hate doesn't have a place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Richard, what
about the
administration or parents
knowing that these
conversations are happening in
the classrooms
of their children?
Have they been supportive?
RICHARD HOUSE: I think so.
I think my goal this year is to
bring certain
as we -- current events to
issue, to light
in my classroom.
We focused on police brutality.
We talked about Colin
Kaepernick's protest.
And after that, I got an e-mail
from a parent
thanking me for bringing those
issues to light,
that they were able to have a
substantive
conversation about police
brutality and privilege,
something that they normally
might not have
had at the dinner table.
So, I think parents are
appreciative when
teachers do bring to light
certain issues
that are currently going on in
our country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Chris
Cavanaugh, how do
you walk the line between
teaching them how
to think and not what to think?
CHRISTOPHER CAVANAUGH: Well, I
think it's
important to create -- listening
to Richard
speak, I think it's important to
create that
environment where it's a safe
environment,
especially maybe for my
students, being a
little bit older and maybe a
little further
along in the political
socialization process,
to have them start to -- a safe
environment
to express those ideas and then
to get them
to examine themselves.
I like to play devil's advocate
quite a bit
with my students, regardless of
what they
support, and to challenge them
on those views
to get them to reexamine their
own views.
And, thankfully, you know, we're
well aware
of fact-checking organizations
that exist,
so we can go back and fact-check
debates to
see what the candidates have
said and how
well it holds up under scrutiny.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Richard, how
do the facts
play into it?
Technically, they're coming into
your classroom.
They're expecting you to maybe
help them see
what is true and what isn't.
How do you get that across?
RICHARD HOUSE: I think, a lot of
times, it's
my job to guide their thinking,
but not tell
them what to think, give them
the resources
out there, so that they can go
out and do
the research and formulate an
opinion on their
own.
For example, today, we were
talking about
voting.
We registered to vote for a mock
election
that we're going to have in with
weeks.
And then we focused on voter
I.D. laws.
I presented information on,
these are how
voter I.D. laws impact people
across this
country.
Do you think that -- and I posed
the question,
do you think this is done
because of voter
fraud, or is it done because --
to place an
unnecessary burden on minority
voters?
And then I wanted them to be
able to formulate
their own opinion.
So, it's my job to present them
with the information
they need, but it's their job to
form their
own opinion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally,
Chris, in this
day and age, your students can
be fairly active
during the debate.
The next morning, when you look
past through
their Twitter feeds or their
Facebook comments,
what are you looking for?
CHRISTOPHER CAVANAUGH: Honestly,
I try not
to do that.
(LAUGHTER)
CHRISTOPHER CAVANAUGH: I have
only had a couple
kids where I have had to go back
and say,
you know, what they posted
perhaps does not
encourage debate.
It doesn't push the debate or
conversation
forward.
You know, you want to avoid the
politics of
the personal attacks.
So, there have only been a
couple kids that
I have had to admonish for that.
So, we try to -- it's difficult,
because we're
trying to promote civic
discourse, civil discourse.
And, unfortunately, we don't see
that in the
adult world as much as -- we
don't see it
modeled for them as much as it
should be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Chris Cavanaugh
from Plainfield High in Indiana
and Richard
House from Gunston Middle School
in Virginia,
thanks for joining us.
RICHARD HOUSE: Thank you for
having me.
CHRISTOPHER CAVANAUGH: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight on
"Frontline": a joint
investigation with ProPublica
into efforts
to combat ISIS on the European
continent.
"Terror in Europe" looks at
government attempts
to counter extremism, revealing
missteps and
systemic breakdowns in the
run-up to the Charlie
Hebdo, Paris and Brussels
attacks.
NARRATOR: As recruits returned
to Europe,
the authorities in France and
Belgium were
overwhelmed.
MAN (through translator): Every
week, people
would come back from Syria.
There was nothing except Syria.
It was all about Syria.
There were so many cases related
to Syria
that people who should have been
watched just
could not be.
Clearly, we can't do everything,
and we didn't
have the means -- we still don't
-- to monitor
all of this.
LOUIS CAPRIOLI, Former French
Domestic Intelligence
Counterterror Chief (through
translator):
That brings up the issue of
having to make
choices.
That is, among all the
possibilities of targets
to monitor, thousands of targets
to monitor,
it's necessary to make choices.
NARRATOR: In June 2014, French
spy chiefs
made a fateful decision.
For the last three years, they
had been monitoring
al-Qaida veterans of the
Buttes-Chaumont gang,
Cherif Kouachi and his brother
Said.
Meanwhile, Kouachi's old
associate Amedy Coulibaly
had just been released from
prison.
French domestic intelligence now
decided to
stop watching them and shift
surveillance
resources on to the growing
threat from ISIS.
HARI SREENIVASAN: "Frontline:
Terror in Europe"
airs tonight on most PBS
stations.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening for a look ahead to our
special live
coverage of the presidential
debate starting
at 9:00 p.m. Eastern.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.